dotnet-scim-blog (#1485)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2024-02-29-net-scim.md

type: awareness
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-net-scim-example
---

Several challenges exist in provisioning users for a growing company across systems and applications. It can be time-consuming, error-prone, challenging to sync users across domains, and potentially a security risk to keep track of existing profiles. Fortunately, a protocol called SCIM (System for Cross-domain Identity Management) standardizes user information across systems, making it possible to sync users. Also, combined with a SCIM-compliant Identity Provider (IdP), it securely automates common user lifecycle operations.
In this tutorial, I'll walk you through building a .NET SCIM server with the CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) Restful API endpoints outlined in the SCIM protocol. We'll then test the server using Swagger User Interface before integrating it with Okta, a SCIM compliant IdP. 

## Use SCIM to manage users
[SCIM](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644) is an HTTP-based protocol defining standard endpoints and schemas to overcome complexity when implementing user lifecycle management operations across different systems.

## Components of a SCIM integration

> There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which is a server that has implemented the endpoints as described in the SCIM spec—for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail creating a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which is a server that has implemented the endpoints as described in the SCIM spec — for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail creating a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.
```

Per style guidelines

Author: em dash is longer than a dash -- hmmm TIL!

> There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which is a server that has implemented the endpoints as described in the SCIM spec — for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail creating a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which has the endpoints implemented as described in the SCIM spec – for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail creating a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.
```

## Build a .NET SCIM server

**Prerequisites**
- dotnet SDK (I used [dotnet 8](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/8.0) in this demo)
- Code Editor (I used Visual Studio Code) 
- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com/)

{% include toc.md %}

### Create a .NET project
Create a directory called `okta-scim-server-dotnet`. Navigate to the directory in your terminal, then run the following commands:
```
dotnet new webapi (Creates a new API project)
dotnet dev-certs https --trust (Trust the self-signed TLS certs)
```

### Test the .NET project using Swagger UI
- Run the project using the command `dotnet watch --launch-profile https`
- At this point using the *https://localhost:7094/swagger/index.html* you will be able to see the Swagger UI. Typically, a browser tab will automatically open; if not, manually check for the URL to the Swagger UI under `Properties/launchSettings.json` and copy/paste this URL onto the browser:

>**Note**: You may get different ports so be sure to double-check the URLs in `Properties/launchSettings.json`.

> ### Setup Okta (the IdP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Set up Okta as your identity provider (IdP) for authentication and authorization
```

working in a few terms people might search on

Again, we can confirm that Tom's account is now `active` through the Swagger UI by making a request to the GET Users endpoint filtering for Tom's email "tom.anderson@fake.domain". 

### Change a user's info in Okta

Let's look at one more scenario. Let's say not only has Tom returned, but he also changed his name! Worry not, as our SCIM connection will automatically propagate this profile update. Let's change Tom's name to Leo and watch how Okta sends the new name to the .NET SCIM server. 

In the Okta Admin Console sidebar, navigate to **Directory** > **People**, and click on Tom's name in the user list to edit their settings. In the **Profile** tab, click **Edit** in the **Attributes** pane. Change the `firstName` field to "Leo", and update their `login` and `email` to `leo.anderson@fake.domain`. Use the **Save** button at the bottom of the page to save your changes. Again, on the Swagger UI, double-check Tom's updated name by making a GET /scim/v2/users request to list all current users.  

> >**Troubleshooting**: If you are experiencing import issues with Okta, double-check that your previous SCIM base URL is not cached under the Provisioning > Integration tab. If it is cached, requests will not be made to your .NET SCIM server. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>**Troubleshooting**: If you experience import issues with Okta, double-check that your previous SCIM base URL isn't cached under the **Provisioning** > **Integration** tab. If it's cached, requests won't be made to your .NET SCIM server. 
```

active and utilize contractions (per style guidelines > decreases formality)

## Keep experimenting with SCIM

> This tutorial provides the fundamental steps to create your .NET SCIM server to manage user lifecycle with an identity provider such as Okta. You can get the complete sample code for this project from [here](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-net-scim-example). Now, you can extend resources supported by adding groups. Or update the SCIM model to add more attributes you may need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides the fundamental steps to create your .NET SCIM server to manage user lifecycle with an identity provider such as Okta. You can get the complete sample code for this project from [the GitHub repository](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-net-scim-example). Now, you can extend resources supported by adding groups. Or update the SCIM model to add more attributes you may need.
```

Clarify link to help with semantics and accesiblity

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to Manage User Lifecycle with .NET and SCIM"
author: ram-gandhi
by: contractor
communities: [.net]

> description: "Manage your users' lifecycle using .NET, SCIM, and an Identity Provider such as Okta."

Reviewer: Should this be 
> Manage your user lifecycles using....

?

tags: [scim,dotnet]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image: blog/net-scim/social.jpg
type: awareness
github: https://github.com/oktadev/okta-net-scim-example
---

Several challenges exist in provisioning users for a growing company across systems and applications. It can be time-consuming, error-prone, challenging to sync users across domains, and potentially a security risk to keep track of existing profiles. Fortunately, a protocol called SCIM (System for Cross-domain Identity Management) standardizes user information across systems, making it possible to sync users. Also, combined with a SCIM-compliant Identity Provider (IdP), it securely automates common user lifecycle operations.
In this tutorial, I'll walk you through building a .NET SCIM server with the CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) Restful API endpoints outlined in the SCIM protocol. We'll then test the server using Swagger User Interface before integrating it with Okta, a SCIM compliant IdP. 

## Use SCIM to manage users

> [SCIM](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644) is an HTTP-based protocol that defines a set of standard endpoints and schemas that developers can use to overcome complexity in implementing user lifecycle management operations across different systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SCIM](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7644) is an HTTP-based protocol defining standard endpoints and schemas to overcome complexity when implementing user lifecycle management operations across different systems.
```

active and concise

## Components of a SCIM integration

> There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which is a server that has implemented the endpoints as described in the SCIM spec - for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail how to create a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two primary components for a SCIM integration. The first is the *SCIM server*, which is a server that has implemented the endpoints as described in the SCIM spec—for example, User endpoints, Group endpoints, Schemas endpoints, etc. The applications team typically develops these endpoints, which leaves the IdP to manage the user profiles. This blog will detail creating a sample SCIM server using .NET. The other component is the *SCIM client*, which makes SCIM-compliant HTTP calls to a SCIM server to exchange user profile information. Okta (the IdP), in our use case, will act as a SCIM client and call the .NET SCIM server we'll build using this tutorial.
```

Grammarly and our guidelines specify em dash, not a dash

## Build a .NET SCIM server

**Prerequisites**
- dotnet SDK (I used [dotnet 8](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/8.0) in this demo)
- Code Editor (I used Visual Studio Code) 
- [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com/)

{% include toc.md %}

### Create a .NET project
Create a directory called `okta-scim-server-dotnet`. Navigate to the directory in your terminal, then run the following commands:
- `dotnet new webapi` (Creates a new API project)
- `dotnet dev-certs https --trust` (Trust the self-signed TLS certs)

### Test the .NET project using Swagger UI
- Run the project using the command `dotnet watch --launch-profile https`
- At this point using the *https://localhost:7094/swagger/index.html* you will be able to see the Swagger UI. Typically, a browser tab will automatically open; if not, manually check for the URL to the Swagger UI under `Properties/launchSettings.json` and copy/paste this URL onto the browser. 

### Setup Okta (the IdP)

> {% include setup/cli.md type="spa" framework="ASP.NET Core" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:7094/swagger/oauth2-redirect.html" logoutRedirectUri="http://localhost:7094" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include setup/cli.md type="spa" loginRedirectUri="http://localhost:7094/swagger/oauth2-redirect.html" logoutRedirectUri="http://localhost:7094" %}
```
Removing because it's not needed for rendering and it just leaves confusion since ASP .NET isn't a SPA

Note the `Issuer` and the `Client ID`. You'll need those values for your authentication configuration coming up soon.

### Create the database models using Entity Framework
This sample uses `EntityFrameworkCore` as the Object Relational Mapper (ORM) and `Sqlite` as the database. Let's develop the database models!

> Add the required dependencies by running the following commands

Reviewer: Any reason you wouldn't want to use multiline code block with shell syntax highlighting?

    {
        this.schemas = new[] { "urn:ietf:params:scim:api:messages:2.0:Error" };
        this.status = status;
        this.detail = detail;
    }
    public IEnumerable<string> schemas {get; private set;}
    public string? detail { get; set; }
    public int status { get; set; }
}
public class ScimUser
{
    public IEnumerable<string> schemas { get; set; }
    public string? id { get; set; }
    public string externalId { get; set; }
    public string userName { get; set; }
    public ScimName name { get; set; }
    public string displayName { get; set; }
    public IEnumerable<ScimEmail> emails { get; set; }
    public bool active { get; set; }
}

public class ScimName
{
    public string givenName { get; set; }
    public string familyName { get; set; }
    public string? middleName { get; set; }
}

public class ScimEmail
{
    public string value { get; set; }
    public string type { get; set; }
    public bool primary { get; set; }
}
```
We also need to create mappers between DB models and SCIM models to avoid many manual conversions. For this, we will use the `AutoMapper` package.
- Install dependencies by running the following commands

>     - `dotnet add package AutoMapper`

Reviewer: Consider multiline code block so you can get the syntax highlighting and help add some variation to the text formatting
